The way my daddy talks is the main reason that he
come over here, because he thought he was running
away from wrong. Because he thinks that people was
not legal, they were not doing right things. And he
wants his family to get a chance to live right. And
if anybody made a mistake, well, make it, pay for
it, or see that he admitted that he make, don't make
somebody else accuse somebody else or make
somebody else pay for the crimes that was
committed. Like those days, he said, we just can't
live with that. We just couldn't. He said, justice
have to be justice no matter what. And he said, we
just couldn't take it anymore. We just have to
stand up around two feet and fight for the rights.
We don't want to know all those things that people
were doing. Just because the man was big man enough
to come and and attack the girls, and the daddy and
the mother can't say nothing, just have to stand
there and look, or stay there, and don't you go say
nothing, because your son will have it, or your
husband will. And you think these things were
still happening after 1920? No, I don't think that
no more things will happen, because all those
people that were working for that, They were gone.
They were gone. They were gone because my daddy
said, we saw the trains. They saw the train that,
you see, they sent a locomotive train. The train
was packed with soldiers, horses, and all the
equipment. They can think. They put on this train.
But they had telephone then. I don't know what year
it was, but they had telephone. They give some tip
off that the train was coming loaded with all those
things. And you know how those mountains are over
there? Well, they sent a locomotive just with no
driver. Just go meet those trains. And they said
those trains, they're still there. My daddy said,
there's no doubt. They're still there because
there's no way nobody can take those. Because
there's what you call a canyon. And they just fall
out. You can see the crying, the smoke and all that.
And my father-in-law told you that day that he saw
little babies crawling like little rats all over.
He said they were I don't remember, say, about 50 or
100 little babies and little kids that they
brought to Sonora and put in an offering. because
their mothers and daddies got killed in the train
wreck. Well, were their mothers and fathers, were
their fathers soldiers, or were they refugees?
They were soldiers, too. And their mothers didn't
want to stay there, so they'd take the kids and
they'd follow them. They were soldaderas. Yeah,
they were with them. And some of them just lived a
lot of common law and everything, having kids on
top of the train or on the side of the road. But
anyway, all those people, we just have to forget
about them. They're just all gone. because my
daddy said, and the few people that, you know, that
didn't get killed, they want to start this other
mess. But, you know, the other people that had more
sense, they said, no, we're going to start this. So
most of them flew the country, so they don't
report. And some of them, a lot of kids got killed.
Most of them got killed, because I know, because we
were talking about it the other day, that this man
got killed when this man's Like my father-in-law
and all of them, they come because, you see, there
were a lot of soldiers, you know, still left. They
had good sense. They said, we're going to put an end
to all these people that started this mess. We're
going to put a stop. And they put a stop. They did
like a caster. You know, they built a, what you call
it, a big hole. And they just put them over there.
Then he had no gun. They stabbed him and put him in
the hole. They have to do that because they say,
then they get out of there and they spread the, you
know, they're going to spread it and make some more
people think the way they think. And they got
killed. They did kill. Now, the ones that got
killed, your father-in-law was with Carranza.
Yes, Carranza. They was, you know, different
generals, I'd say, different generals. But they
were always the same call, attacking the federal
government. They were attacking the federal
government The federal government was crooked as
ever because he didn't have no law. They had no
government. Well, did your father stay with Pablo
Gonzalez the whole time, or did he eventually join
Villa? No, he joined Villa because Villa and
Gonzalez, they had some partnership. They were
together part of the time. They were some partners
in some way. I think there's some money. And they
deal with some money and with some ammunition.
Yeah. I'm trying to remember. I think Pablo
Gonzalez was under Carranza, wasn't he? And, of
course, Carranza and Villa were on the same side
for a long time. And then later were against each
other. Did your father actually meet Villa? Yeah.
How did he describe him? Well, he said he, you know
how people think about another man. My daddy used
to get up. He's a little man. He used to get up. get up
and say oh he said Villa was a man with the knowledge
understanding and all that but still and all the
things he did he did wrong now that's the way he put
it you know when you talk about you know soldier he
start telling us so you know think he he was a good
man he had a good uh education I think and he had he
thought he had a good knowledge but he's dying he
died thinking he was doing right, but he was doing
wrong because he come to a place with some girls. He
messed those girls up without any... He used to be
pretty good about that. Yeah, that's what my daddy
said. So he said, now, you see, you can't put a good
man to do those things and then tell the nation that
he was a good man. You can't say that. He thought he
died. He died. thinking that he was doing right,
but he wasn't doing right. But what did your father
used to say about Pablo Gonzales? Oh, he thought he
was a good man. He thought he was fighting for the
rights of the people. He thought he was a high
standard soldier or man. What ever happened to
Pablo Gonzales? I've forgotten. I don't know. You
know, it's been a long time that I haven't talked to
him, but he knew everything about those men.
Everything. They had huerta, and some of them were
named huerta. What did he say about huerta? Well,
you know, they used to send some men to certain
places. They were military men, and they were
well-disciplined. If you don't obey orders,
well, he'll come and punch those men. And they used
what you call a sable, like that. and he'll put
somebody to. And if he say, well, execute that man,
and you know, hit him so many legs, and he don't like
it, well, you have to hit him again. And so that
teach him a lesson not to disobey the military
order. When they, yes, they send you to somewhere,
you better go over there and do whatever we ever
say, or else don't come back. You know, that he
believes in not a military discipline, because he
was a soldier. He knew his work and everything. Now
what rank did you say you thought he had? Well, he
thought he was, my daddy thought he was fighting
for the right of the... Oh, what rank? Oh, rank. He
was a captain. He was a captain in the army of Pablo
Gonzales. Pablo Gonzales, yeah. He was a captain.
And you know, my brother used to laugh because he's
a little bitter man. He said, oh, this man, he don't
know nothing. And you know, my daddy... Every time
he tells us something, he says, and that's an
order. And that's an order. And my mother said,
he's not talking to you as a father. He's talking to
you as a soldier. I was giving you some orders. And
you know, when he was going to whip us, he said,
y'all look for the belt. And we just looking for the
belt. He had one, but he wanted us to go and get the
thing for you one to be executed. And after we don't
find the belt, but he got his. And he just give about
two or three licks, but he'll tell you why and where
and when. And yeah, he was not kind of a man, he'd go
bang, bang. No, he'll explain to you. I told you not
to do this. Yes. Why did you do it? Well, something
went wrong. Well, this is to remember not to do it
again. And boy, Every time Mother said, well, I
won't tell you, Daddy. We were, Mother, don't tell
him. We know he was going to get it. But he said that
he thought Villa was, in the sense of a soldier, he
was a good soldier, what you call a good soldier. He
had a good understanding, good knowledge. He
said, but he was wrong. He was doing wrong.
He got to meet him in person, talk with him, eat with
him, and everything. Did your father ever talk
about any battles he was in or anything? Yes, he
said he talks about some of them. And then he talked
about sometimes they were so thirsty, they were so
hungry. He said, well, sometimes we have to shoot
our own horse and eat it because there was nothing
else to eat. Yeah, he used to talk about, he said he
don't believe in the word is seen in any good in any
language because he said he saw a lot of things that
he didn't have to see if they didn't even you know
think about doing things right he said but uh i saw
some things that boy it just he just don't want to
think about now that he got an old little man he said
but it was some some tough days that we didn't have
nothing to eat and then especially when you start
shooting he said you thought we'd get so dry And he
said, look like you, and you don't know, and you can
see just the fire. And now you can see the fire just
like a firecracker. And you're just shooting at
nobody because you're shooting just, you don't
know if that bullet is going to hit you or nothing.
It's just a chance that you're going to take. He
said sometimes they shoot all night. And see, the
next morning, there'll be some children, but that
much children. They shouldn't all die. I don't
know how many around. Well, now, so many years
after the revolution, what kind of place do you
think Mexico is to live? Well, Mexico is, the way I
went over there, the way it looks, it's all right. I
think Mexico is doing all right. Because I went to
all these places that I wanted to go. Where all did
you go? I went to all the department stores. I went
to the stores. I went to the church. In what town? In
Monclova. In Monclova. And they got everything
that we got. They got everything that we got. They
haven't missed anything. One thing, just one
thing that I saw, that they should have so many
babies. So many, you know, the families are, the
couples are real babies. loaded with babies you
know a couple about around 20 25 years old or they
they already got by six or seven babies you know and
they're so young they look so pretty and the babies
are real pretty but i think that's where they're i
won't say a mistake but i think that's what they
need to do some little work you know if they had a
they'd have a more
protection or something like that that we they
don't have to deal with so many little babies and
that you know sometimes a lot of babies are not are
not good for the girl for the for the female and
sometimes i don't know i'm not against the babies
but what it is that they they haven't got any any
well the neighborhood that i went they got no no
sinks no no tubs like we do no no no nothing like uh
the restrooms is outside and all that, and that
maybe in the future they're going to, there's some
communities that they already got everything,
but now these other ones, they are just about
building. They just got a little room like this,
and a whole eight, nine, or two little kids live
there, and the mom and the dad, and the kitchen and
everything is the same. Who were you visiting when
you were there? I visited my mom.
My son lost his mom and dad. Your son lost his mother
and dad? Yeah. And he's from Montclova? Yeah, he's
from Montclova. But you see, well, they well off
because they got a big brick house bigger than
mine. And it's brand new. They just made it. Now
they well off. They want the vices. But what I'm
talking about, you know, the other little... You
went out to some other parts of town. Some other
parts of town. And the streets are not very...
They're not fixed, you know. They just got dirt
roads and just a lot of rocks and everything and
just a bunch of little kids in the streets and all
that. But it's the same way as here. But what it is,
they all go to school. That's one thing I've got to
say. That little boy, little girl, about six,
seven years, he know how to read and write in
Spanish just like the little kids over here in
English. And they know how to multiply and
everything. You know, that's what I admired in.
But I still say that, like I told my son-in-law, he
says that, yeah, I just got two, Mom, and I've been
married about six years, seven years. He said, but
that's when they got on one, Mom, who liked to have
so many babies. He said, well, because I noticed
they don't have any. Mm-hmm. Who is your
son-in-law? What religion are you? You're
Methodist, aren't you? Well, my son-in-law was
Catholic, but until he come and meet my girl over
here, he become a Methodist. He joined the
Methodist church? He joined the Methodist
church, and he said he liked it. And then he said he
didn't like to deal with so many babies because he
said it's hard for the men to support them, baby. He
said that he just don't know how these people
support those babies. We saw so many, you know, we
went close to Christmas, and they were all out
there chopping. I don't know how many little
babies. They were about this big, about this big.
There's like a little letter and another one and
another one away from me. I tell my husband, they
look pretty, all right. I said, but I hate to be here
with you two. He said, because I just wondered how
they do to support all those babies. And then my
husband said, well, how did you do with yours? I
said, yeah, but it was not so mean. I don't know,
maybe they got more tap than we do to support all
those ladies. And they sleep on the floor, just in
the little rug or something. And they got no
heaters. I didn't see no heaters over there. I saw a
stove, you know, running with a butane. Everybody
got butane over there. They believe a lot in
butane. Even in the country, they got butane. But I
didn't see no heaters. Very few. There are very few
houses heated in Mexico. It used to be that way here
when we moved to Texas in 1950. Nobody had heat. And
we were worse. I guess you didn't have heat when you
were growing up in the Brazos Valley. Well, we had a
chimney. You had a fireplace? A fireplace, yeah.
That's what I was talking about. I said, you know,
we'll be here. It's a lot of different, because we
have some wood. We have some wood for fireplace. We
have some wood. But I didn't see no heaters, no kind
in the house. But of course, it's not so cold over
there, neither. No, not as often, anyway. That's
what I was thinking about. It's not too cold,
neither, because it's just more of the south than
we do here. But that's why I think that those people
got everything. Everything. I went to look for a
stanchion like that, and it was there. And the bub
and everything, they showed me everything. And
they got everything. Paints. I was looking for
some paint, and they showed me the paint and the
brush and everything. They got everything.
Everything. Do you feel like they have problems
now with the law and all the kinds of things that
used to happen? No, no, I don't think so because
those people are more, you know, more aware of the
thing because they know that if anybody do
something, they get what they coming. They don't
have to pay for the crime they commit. You feel like
they solve those problems. Yeah, those problems,
yeah. And then this truck had a lot of means that
they were in penitentiary. And you know, all the
men we got here in Huntsville in the penitentiary,
well, we didn't have to pay the city nothing. We
bring all those men to clean the city. Over there,
they brought all the men from penitentiary to
clean the city. And the guards was there. They was
cleaning all the city. And told my son-in-law, my
husband told my son-in-law, one of those men said
they from penitentiary. They were different.
with the struts. They were in penitentiary. He
said, but we don't have to pay no city people. They
don't know, we ain't got no city people. Those are
the people that come and do the cleaning. Well,
it's kind of the same way in Huntsville. The prison
guards, I mean, the prisoners in Huntsville do a
lot of the work on the college campus and the parks
and everything. They do all that over there, too.
Well, you see, what I mean is not that, you know, we
don't take them out of there to come and clean the
brine. No, not the brine. That's what I meant. But
they do use them in Huntsville. Yeah, they do their
own cultivation. They grow their own food. That's
what I heard. I see them working on the field. But
what I meant is that the prisoners don't have to
come and clean. Clean brine. Clean brine. They
come from over there to the city, to the streets and
get the garbage. But they do over there. That way
the government is having a little help there. Is
there a big prison in Monclova? No, I didn't ask
Johnny, but they saw those men and they just said
that they were people to see. I hope not, but my boy
and a bunch of boys went to Monterey.
They went to the orphan.
They said they had so many little boys, but from
eight, nine, and ten. Almost the same age. And they
went to the convent to sing for the nuns because the
Methodist from Dallas, they furnished the bus and
they gave him $700 just to make a trip, you know, to
let the, what you call the Southwest Comforts to
get involved in Mexico to see what they can work
over there, develop something or see something or
something. And they went over there, and they were
very impressed, and they would approach my boy and
say, Mama, you can see all the little boys. They
ain't got no mommy nor daddy. They were little
boys. But my boys' organization, they're going to
give $75 each year, which is almost $1,000 over
there, so the little orphan kids can have at least a
good meal every now and then. Did he find out why
there were so many orphans? No, they didn't talk
about that. They just said that there were
orphans. The orphans, they took them over there.
The ministers took them over there to sing and to
learn them to say things in English. And they sing
in English and Spanish. So they can get something
different from what they've been teaching over
there. They like it. The little boys like it. And
then they went to the convent. They went to the
plaza. They went to all the places, you know. They
stayed about a week or so, but my boy said they were
very impressive. He said the town was good, and the
names were good, and the people were so polite, and
they liked it. Yeah, I like Monterey. It's a nice
city. Yeah, I like the food. I do like the food very
much. And I told my husband, I said, I think they got
me. The way they talk, I said, they got law and
order. I said, ain't nothing wrong. They're just a
lot of people, that's all. There's a lot of Spanish
people, that's all. In Monclova, 78,000. That's a
pretty good size. Yeah, the population is 78,000.
You can see miles and miles, and you can see corners
and streets and pools. People, I just see one
colored boy. And he talk in Spanish. I don't know
what he say. He was sitting at the window, and
another boy approached him and said the shoes that
were there, he liked that. But he said it in
Spanish, so I don't know where he comes from. But I
didn't say no one Anglo or nothing else, but just
Spanish. And I thought, when I saw that color
board, I said, where did he come from? And he showed
some shoe that he was a bison shoe. It cost about 200
pesos. Now your husband's family came from Mexico
in 1918. Was your husband born here or there?
There. He was born there. He was born in June 1917.
And he doesn't really remember coming up here. No,
he was nine months old. And I was less than a year. Me
too. I don't remember nothing about that. But now I
remember that I took that trip. I remember
everything good and I'll never forget. Have you
been just the one time? One time. How long ago was
that? Last year. Last year? Last year, but I went to
Laredo first. I went to Laredo, but I've been taken
to Crip. And this year I did want to take one, but it
was a time for my vacation, so I couldn't take it.
And so they went over there, but I'm planning to
take them home to Oklahoma. Yeah, to see your
parents. Yeah. And your father. My dad, yeah. I
want to see. How did you happen to meet your
husband? We was living here at the bottom, what you
call the breast of that, the other bottom. And we
moved to Hillock because this boy was going to
marry my sister. And then he said that they have
some good houses and good Then maybe my daddy can
make better trade over there than over here. My
daddy, well, let's go over there. And so my sister
got married, and she had a big wedding. And my
husband and his brother happened to come to the
wedding. And that's where they, he saw me. I saw
him, and he saw me. And then about a year later, he
wrote me a letter as I was staying in the state of
Oklahoma. We were working over there, and I
received a letter from him that he wants to have
some love affair or something with me. And so I
didn't really think, thought about who he was. I
said, well, we have a bunch of girls over there, and
all the girls had letters and everything. And they
said, well, let's sit over here and make a
decision. What should I say? Well, let's say yes
just for the fun of it. And he didn't even know who he
is. And so I did wrote the letter back, answered the
letter back. When I come back from the state of
Oklahoma, that I come back to him, he show up. And he
said that he was the one that wrote me a letter. And
so from there, we started from there. After a year,
and three months, and three weeks, and a hundred
days, we got back. Did your parents let you
actually go out on dates? No. No, they didn't
believe in that. No, they don't want the boys to
come see the girls. They don't want the boys to get
the girls out of the house. We couldn't get out of
the house. We had a little well about a block or two
from the house. We just have to go get the water from
the faucet in the back. We traveled back and forth,
of course, to get some water and water all day. But
that's all we could do. And you made it the well. No,
the boys, they used to have a baseball diamond over
there. And all the boys and men from the farm get
together over there to play. We just go over there
and get the water and look. Just about five minutes
and you better come back because you can't stay
there. No, they were very strict at that point. We
couldn't, we couldn't go out. Well, actually, I
never did go out with a boy myself one day or one
evening or one night, one hour or so. I used to talk
to my husband about twice. It was in my
sister-in-law's house. He made a visit over
there. This other girl happened to take me over
there to work playing the record. And he was there.
And he said, well, finally I saw Maggie along. And
he talk about, you know, he was older than me. We
were talking about plants and wedding plants and
all that. And I began to get scared. How old were you
then? I was about 16. I was just shaking. I said, no,
no, no, no. He said, yes, he said. Go and ask your
father, you better not come over the house if you
don't want my father to raise him some cane. He
said, well, then I'll wait. How much will you want
me to wait now? I don't know. And he keep, you know,
boys, would be boys, he keep, you know, he was 22.
Well, he was 21 then, and he was 22, and then he was
23. And when Geek got married, he was 24. He was
still waiting all this time. So when you got
married, you were how old? 17. 17, yeah. And, well,
did he finally come see your father? No, he never
did come. He was scared. You know, the boys used to
have a lot of respect for that. Well, how did you
happen to get married? We just eloped. You eloped.
Oh. And just run away. Yeah, just run away. He come
to my house and at night after a thief and just took
me to his house and then we were the next day the next
day they they called the minister and you know he
always been a methodist he called the minister and
said well you have to forgive me i need a wife and i
think i'll look for one and i found it and this is the
girl no one married and the minister said well
there's nothing wrong we'll get you license and
and we'll be here tonight to marry you Was it all
right with his parents? They were in on it. They
were all right because his son had committed a
crime there because he had no business going to
that house and bringing a girl. But then I was under
age, you know, 17. But he said, well, as long as she
don't complain, we're not going to say anything.
My daddy didn't complain then because he was mad.
He said he didn't want to take any part in the
wedding when my husband bought me to town, bought
me my dress and my everything and the wedding cake
and everything and we just, we were married that
night. Did your mother and daddy come? No, they
didn't come. How long was it before they came
around? Five years. Five years? Five years before
they got over? They got over. Five years I had to
stay away from the house because they didn't want
Because they were Catholics. And they think that
the Protestants and the Catholics should get
involved because they thought it was a sin. Well,
we didn't see it that way. We love each other, and we
need each other, and we do care about no religion.
Well, how about your sisters, though? Did they
have trouble, too, when they got married? No, my
sister was married to a Catholic man. I see. So one
of the reasons that your father didn't accept your
husband was the religion. Yeah, but my sister had a
pretty wedding. That's where I got to meet him. My
husband was this man of... friends and they
invited him to the wedding. We set the table and I
remember that I had a dress that my mother had made
me. It was a blue, a blue taffeta dress. A lot of, you
know, shiny, real shiny. I thought I was the queen
because I never did wear one like that. And I was so
impressed by that dress and I thought I was going
crazy. And then she put some white a collar and a
little, like a little, she made like a little tie.
And I would just, you know, go in places and then he
asked the question, who is she? I said, that's the
bride's sister. Oh, well, very interesting. Any
more sisters around here? She said, no, she's the
only one. Well, we'll get it before the Thank you so
much. I was just thinking, for a long time, a lot of
parents were pretty strict with their daughters.
What about now? Is it that way now? Well, some
Spanish men still, but some don't. They already
find out that, you know, like me and my husband said
this way when we got married, if we ever get having
any family, We're not going to be a sire because
they were hard on us. We enjoy the life. We're just
working and not enjoying. We can go to the dance. We
can go to the movie. We can go to church. We can go
nothing. Nowhere. You stay there like an old maid
at the age of 16 or 17. And my husband said, yes,
we're never going to be with the girls. Now my
oldest daughter got married at 22. And we didn't
have no problem. And she didn't go out. She didn't
go out. I've got one over there. She's 21, and she
don't go out. And we didn't tell her not to go out. I
tell my husband, well, I don't know what happened.
I said, I got my other girl. She's 15. She don't go
out with boys. And she's 21. And I said, I haven't
seen a boy, you know, framed and running around or
asking for a date or nothing. And she said, I don't
know. I tell my husband, how about us? We were just
tied to a tree. And I said, I didn't tie my girls. I
said, well, y'all go and see the world and make your
own decisions and work and have a good time, have a
lot of fun with people. My kids are going to church.
They go to the meetings, to the church, to the
service, to sing here and there and over there and
anywhere. It's not one thing. That one, Joseph,
she went to that racetrack yesterday and walked 20
miles. Yes, bless her heart. She was limping. Yes,
she's got burns all over here. Is she the one that's
21? Mm-hmm. She's 21, I said, and I tell my husband,
I say, and she's having a lot of fun. That car is
hers, and she worked, and she paid her car. And
where is she working now? Coca-Cola. At the
Coca-Cola, yeah. Before that, she worked
somewhere. with me over there when she was in high
school. She was about 14. She always thought about
buying a car. She bought that car and she's paying
for it. She's having a lot of friends, a lot of
girls, and of course a lot of boys too. But I don't
see that, you know, he attached to one boy and go out
with him running around with that boy. I said,
well, maybe it's her nature or maybe she's, I don't
know. She just on the quiet side of the family, or I
don't know. And sometimes I go, when is she going to
get married? I say, I think she's going to marry
when you're 24. When she's 24. But
I think we are doing all right. If we get to leave to
January the 21st, we'll be married 31 years. 31
years. 31 years in the month. I was talking to the
lady that I work. She said, I'll be married to my
husband 55. 55 years. I said, well, and another
girl, they don't know me. He said, I thought you was
not married that long. I said, well, 31 years, you
think it's not long? I said, I don't think he's not
here. I said, I think I can do another 31 real easy.
He said, you mean your husband took a trip to Mexico
and you didn't go? I said, no. I trusted him a lot. I
said, and said, he will come back. They called this
morning. They're leaving Tuesday. They're
leaving from Oklahoma. I said, he will come back.
He's not going nowhere without me.
I think the life is like you want it, you know.
harder or easier you want to make. If you want to
make life harder, there's a way you can make it
harder. Yeah. And when they make it easier,
there's a way you can make your life easier.
Because I tell my kids, I say, well, do unto others
as you like them to do unto you. If you like to do
things, just do something to somebody. They sure
will do it back to you. It generally works that way.
Yeah. Mm-hmm.
You need to get...